Bibliography
Correlates and Consequences of Juvenile Exposure to Violence in the United
States, 1995

This bibliography includes published and unpublished works that are related 
to ICPSR study 3986. It includes works that are based on primary
or secondary analysis of the data, or which describe or critique those
data or the collection methodology. 

If you publish a work or know of other works that are based on these data,
please send the complete citation and name of the ICPSR study used to:
icpsr-biblio-notify@umich.edu 


1. Lawrence, Daysha R.; Nofziger, Stacey, "Exploring the relationship
between physical victimization, deviant peer associations, and substance
abuse/dependence." Presented at the 2010 American Society of Criminology
Annual Meeting, American Society of Criminology, San Francisco, CA, Nov 17,
2010.

2. Nofziger, Stacey, "Correlates and Consequences of Juvenile Exposure to
Violence: A Replication and Extension of Major Findings from the National
Survey of Adolescents, Final Technical Report." NCJ 203987, Washington, DC:
United States Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice
[distributor]. University of Akron [producer], Aug 2003. 2002-IJ-CX-0004
Abstract: https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/Publications/abstract.aspx?ID=203987
Full text PDF: http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/203987.pdf
In our society, exposure to violence is a common event. A number of
deleterious outcomes have been associated with exposure to violence, such
as an increased risk of drug abuse and engagement in delinquent behavior.
It is possible that the setting in which violence is witnessed is important
to how juveniles are affected by that violence. As such, the current study
analyzed the impact of exposure to violence on various forms of
delinquency, particularly violence in school settings. The two main
research objectives were to replicate and extend the original analysis of
the NSA and to examine the context and consequences of school violence.
Data for the NSA were derived from a national probability telephone sample
of 4,023 juveniles between the ages of 12 and 17. Respondents were asked
about their experiences with victimization, other forms of exposure to
stressful life events, their assessment of peer and family deviance, their
own delinquent activities, and several indicators of drug and alcohol
abuse. Results of frequencies, cross-tabular, and logistic regression
analysis revealed important differences between the original analysis and
the current findings. The original analysis found that one of the strongest
predictors of drug abuse was witnessing violence. In the current study,
controls for income, peer deviance, and location of witnessed violence
eliminated the significance of PTSD on drug abuse. Furthermore, when the
location of the violence was controlled, exposure to violence was only a
predictor of marijuana use. As for the second research objective of
examining the context and consequences of school violence on adolescents,
the analysis revealed that witnessing violence in school was a risk factor
for engaging in serious forms of delinquency and for believing that
violence was a serious problem in schools and communities.

3. Nofziger, Stacey, "Correlations and Consequences of Juvenile Exposure to
Violence: A Replication and Extension of Major Findings from the National
Survey of Adolescents, Executive Summary." NCJ 203981, Washington, DC:
United States Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice
[distributor]. University of Akron [producer], Aug 2003. 2002-IJ-CX-0004
Abstract: https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/Publications/abstract.aspx?ID=203981
Full text PDF: http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/203981.pdf
The two main research objectives were, first, replicate and extend the
original analysis of the NSA and, second, to examine the context and
consequences of school violence. Data for the NSA were derived from a
national probability sample of 4,023 juveniles between the ages of 12 and
17. Respondents were asked about their experiences with several forms of
victimization, other forms of exposure to stressful life events, their
assessment of peer and family deviance, their own delinquent activities,
and several indicators of drug and alcohol abuse. The initial analysis of
the NSA examined the relationship between posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and drug abuse or dependence. The original analysis found that one
of the strongest predictors of drug abuse was witnessing violence. Results
of frequencies, cross-tabular, and logistic regression analysis of NSA data
revealed important differences between the original analysis and the
current findings. Controls for income, peer deviance, and location of
witnessed violence eliminated the significance of PTSD on drug abuse.
Furthermore, when the location of the witnessed violence was controlled,
exposure to violence was only a predictor of marijuana use. As for the
second research objective of examining the context and consequences of
school violence on adolescents, the analysis revealed that witnessing
violence in school was a risk factor for engaging in serious forms of
delinquency and for believing that violence was a serious problem in
schools and communities. However, witnessing violence at school, or any
other location, was found to increase the risk of using marijuana, but not
other drugs or alcohol. As such, witnessing violence does increase the
general risk for drug and alcohol behaviors but no particular location for
witnessing violence generates a larger risk than others.

4. Nofziger, Stacey, "Deviant lifestyles and violent victimization at
school." Journal of Interpersonal Violence. Sep 2009, 24, (9), 1494 - 1517.
DOI: 10.1177/0886260508323667
Abstract: https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/Publications/abstract.aspx?ID=203981
Full text PDF: http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/203981.pdf
The two main research objectives were, first, replicate and extend the
original analysis of the NSA and, second, to examine the context and
consequences of school violence. Data for the NSA were derived from a
national probability sample of 4,023 juveniles between the ages of 12 and
17. Respondents were asked about their experiences with several forms of
victimization, other forms of exposure to stressful life events, their
assessment of peer and family deviance, their own delinquent activities,
and several indicators of drug and alcohol abuse. The initial analysis of
the NSA examined the relationship between posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and drug abuse or dependence. The original analysis found that one
of the strongest predictors of drug abuse was witnessing violence. Results
of frequencies, cross-tabular, and logistic regression analysis of NSA data
revealed important differences between the original analysis and the
current findings. Controls for income, peer deviance, and location of
witnessed violence eliminated the significance of PTSD on drug abuse.
Furthermore, when the location of the witnessed violence was controlled,
exposure to violence was only a predictor of marijuana use. As for the
second research objective of examining the context and consequences of
school violence on adolescents, the analysis revealed that witnessing
violence in school was a risk factor for engaging in serious forms of
delinquency and for believing that violence was a serious problem in
schools and communities. However, witnessing violence at school, or any
other location, was found to increase the risk of using marijuana, but not
other drugs or alcohol. As such, witnessing violence does increase the
general risk for drug and alcohol behaviors but no particular location for
witnessing violence generates a larger risk than others.

5. Nofziger, Stacey; Kurtz, Don, "Violent lives: A lifestyle model linking
exposure to violence to juvenile violent offending." Journal of Research in
Crime and Delinquency. Feb 2005, 42, (1), 3 - 26. DOI:
10.1177/0022427803262061 NCJ 208485 93-ij-cx-0023; 2002-ij-cx-0004
Abstract: https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/Publications/abstract.aspx?ID=208485
